An eclipse of the Moon (or lunar eclipse) can only occur at Full Moon, and only if the Moon passes through some portion of Earth's shadow. That shadow is actually composed of two cone-shaped components, one nested inside the other. The outer or penumbral shadow is a zone where the Earth blocks part but not all of the Sun's rays from reaching the Moon. In contrast, the inner or umbral shadow is a region where the Earth blocks all direct sunlight from reaching the Moon.


 How often do lunar eclipses happen?
During the 21st century, there are 85 total lunar eclipses; a specific geographical location on the surface of the Earth will be able to see an average 40 to 45 total lunar eclipses or about one about every 2.3 years. Contrast this to a total eclipse of the sun, which, as seen from a specific geographic location occurs on an average of once every 375 years.



Thermal shock wave!
When the Earth's shadow sweeps across the lunar landscape, the temperature drops radically. In fact, the resulting "thermal shock" may cause lunar rocks to crumble and gas to escape from within the moon.  Normally, as the sun slowly sets on the moon, the drop in temperature is gradual. But if sunlight is shut off when the sun is high in the lunar sky, the drop is much more rapid – over a span of just 10 to 30 minutes. 

During a total lunar eclipse in 1971, temperatures were monitored at two Apollo landing sites. At the Apollo <br>12 site on the Ocean of Storms, the temperature dropped from 168.3 degrees Fahrenheit (75.7 degrees <br>Celsius) to minus 153 degrees F (minus 1021 C), a 321.3-degree change. At the Apollo 14 Fra Mauro site, <br>the temperature dropped from 154.1 degrees F to minus 153 degrees F (67.8 degrees C to minus 102 degrees C)<br>, a change of 307.1 degrees.



"Hot spots" during totality
Interestingly, infrared images of the eclipsed moon have revealed literally hundreds of "hot spots" as well as large areas on the lunar surface that were warmer than their surroundings. Scans of some prominent craters, such as Tycho, seem to suggest a heat-release pattern caused principally by stored solar heat rather than heat from the moon’s interior, while other craters, like Gassendi seem to show the sort of thermal behavior that one would expect of an internal heat source. Although this phenomenon has been studied for over 50 years, and several theories have been put forth to explain it nobody has determined a definitive solution as to why such hot spots" exist when the moon is completely immersed in the Earth's dark shadow. 



Lunar Eclipses Only Occur During a Full Moon
When the moon is opposite the sun, with the Earth in between casting its shadow on the moon, a lunar eclipse occurs. We don't have a lunar eclipse at the full moon each month because the moon's orbit is tilted 5 degrees more than the Earth's orbit.



There Are Three Types of Lunar Eclipse
The partial lunar eclipse of Dec. 31, 2009
The partial lunar eclipse of Dec. 31, 2009. A partial lunar eclipse is marked by the Earth's shadow only covering a small portion of the moon. Stephen Hanafin/flickr
A lunar eclipse can be total, partial or penumbral. A total eclipse happens when the shadow of the Earth fully covers the moon. A partial eclipse (pictured above) is when the Earth’s shadow covers just a portion of the moon. A penumbral eclipse involves the Earth’s lighter outer shadow (penumbra) covers the moon. Penumbral shadows often go unnoticed by casual sky watchers.


During a total lunar eclipse, the moon will go through partial eclipses on either side of totality.


'Totality' Is the Term for When the Moon Is Completely Darkened
This can only happen during a total lunar eclipse.

5. You Could See a Lunar Eclipse


Refraction Causes the Moon to Look Red During an Eclipse
A lunar eclipse with a red moon
The moon often turns a rusty shade of red during lunar eclipses due to how the Earth's light is refracting. Guian Bolisay/flickr
The moon looks reddish, often called a blood moon, during an eclipse because of the way light is refracted in the Earth's atmosphere. This is called Rayleigh scattering, which is the same reason why sunsets and sunrises are reddish in color.

The exact color of the moon is also influenced by the particles in the Earth’s atmosphere at the time of the event.

7. Lunar Eclipses Have Time Limits
Of course, lunar eclipses don't last forever, but more specifically, lunar eclipses cannot last longer than 3 hours and 40 minutes, according to the National Maritime Museum in London. Also, totality can only last for up to 1 hour and 40 minutes. Some can be much shorter. This is due to the shape of the Earth's shadow. It's cone-shaped, so depending on where the moon is traveling within the shadow, the time it takes to get out of the shadow varies.